# Explainable Prescriptive Analytics for Customer Journey and Process Mining

Process mining is the collection of granular event level data in order to infer the sequence and structure of the flow of events. With the proliferation of internet and digitalization, process mining can be applied to nearly any domain where it is possible to record any data, primarily for analytical applications, such as monitoring and auditing. Further, this enables process analysts to build better, more accurate models of the event data, and make predictions based on these models. This framework of monitoring and predicting has been quite successful in the recent past but has its own limitations in being able to take the following steps of making decisions and implementing actions. 

A recent extension of this process analytics framework is the concept of prescriptive analytics, which goes a step further by assessing the predictions to classify their level of risk and making appropriate recommendations to mitigate this risk. For a business, this would imply replacing the human-driven post-hoc actions with well-informed automated and proactive recommender systems. This creates value by saving resources, and implementing accurate and timely recommendations to customers aimed at improving the business performance. With an automated system, there also arises a need for explainability of any system that leads to higher transparency of recommendations and improved credibility of the overall framework. While prescriptive analytics aims to minimize human involvement in process analytics, the involved machine learning algorithms often lead to black-box models. It is crucial for analysts to really understand the reasonings behind the model recommendations in order to improve its performance, justify its implementation, and improve the overall confidence in the system.

The key research question investigated in this thesis is how to design a machine learning based self-actuating tool for optimizing any KPIs, that product owners can implement with high confidence.
This would involve the design of an explainable process-aware recommender system based on prescriptive analytics that includes the consideration of deep learning techniques, and evaluation by implementing on real world data from an online platform to improve certain performance metrics. The performance metrics can be customized by the respective process stakeholder to optimize the recommendations towards a particular pre-defined objective. This work would also provide an additional layer of explainability of its recommendations in-order to achieve high credibility and more confidence with users. Thus, the objectives of the thesis will be twofold. First, to build a process-aware recommender system based on prescriptive analytics to effectively predict the level of engagement of customers on an online learn-to-code platform, GrepS, and suggest interventions to improve engagement. Secondly, to evaluate the recommender system with novel analysis techniques in order to present a white-box model to product owners aimed at improving the understandability and overall credibility of the recommender system.

The first objective would be based on the article published by Marcus Dees, and the thesis project of Laurens Reulink. Their work defines a framework for the design and evaluation of process-aware recommender systems; which involves building a process prediction model leveraging event logs and defining preferred KPIs to model recommendations for their improvement within a unified graphical user interface. This framework would be implemented and evaluated using the event log from the GrepS system, to develop a process model, build a prediction system, and make recommendations with the aim of minimizing customers from discontinuing the usage of the platform and improve overall stickiness of customers to the platform. While their work only deals with non-neural network algorithms, this implementation would be extended to include  deep learning approaches such as LSTMs, RNNs, multi-staged NNs for the prediction technique.

The second objective would be based on the recent publications in the Explainable AI (xAI) domain relevant to process predictions, such as:
1. Prescriptive Process Analytics With Deep Learning And Explainable Artificial Intelligence - that applies an XAI technique, Partial Dependence Plots (PDP), on business process prediction and customer journey analytics, to generate causal explanations
2. Explainable Artificial Intelligence for Process Mining: A General Overview and Application of a Novel Local Explanation Approach for Predictive Process Monitoring - that approaches explainability by defining local regions from the validation dataset using the intermediate latent space representations learned by the deep neural networks 
3. Explainable Process Predictions (xPP): A Holistic Framework and Applications  - that applies deep learning approaches to process prediction problems and proposes a conceptual framework for its explainability in addition to presenting use-cases for its applicability 
4. Making LSTM-Based Next Activity Predictions Explainable by Using LRP - that integrates a layer-wise relevance propagation (LRP) method from XAI to make next activity predictions of a long short-term memory (LSTM) DNN explainable by providing relevance values for each activity in the course of a running trace 

References:
1. Design and Evaluation of a Process-aware Recommender System based on Prescriptive Analytics https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/9229931
2. PRESCRIPTIVE PROCESS ANALYTICS WITH DEEP LEARNING AND EXPLAINABLE ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE https://arxiv.org/ftp/arxiv/papers/2009/2009.02098.pdf
3. Explainable Process Predictions (xPP) http://ceur-ws.org/Vol-2703/paperDC9.pdf
4. Making LSTM-Based Next Activity Predictions Explainable by Using LRP https://arxiv.org/pdf/2008.07993.pdf
